## A New Perspective

The programming world is full of a stunning variety of languages. If you drew out a graph containing each language and what influenced it, you'd have something similar to a family tree. It's tremendously valuable to try learning a variety of them to open your mind about different ways to solve the same problem.

There are two primary ways we categorize programming languages: **syntax** (how it looks) and **paradigm** (how it works). The syntax is about the visual character of the language, while the paradigm is about the way that language accomplishes its tasks.

### Syntax

The most popular syntax today is derived from **C**. Generally, languages with C-like syntax define variables with an `=` sign, call functions by writing their name followed by parenthesis, and write code blocks using curly braces.

Clojure, on the other hand, uses a syntax derived from **Lisp**. Lisp is the second oldest programming language (after Fortran), and its defining feature is that the syntax is completely regular; everything is written the same way.

Let's look at a side-by-side comparison:

| **C syntax**                         | **Lisp syntax**                     |
|--------------------------------------|-------------------------------------|
| `int score = 1;`                     | `(def score 1)`                     |
| `sayHello("Alice");`                 | `(say-hello "Alice")`               |
| `if (isDone) { sayHello("Alice"); }` | `(if is-done? (say-hello "Alice"))` |

In Clojure, everything is defined by placing values between parenthesis, and making the first item the name of the action. It doesn't matter if that action is defining a variable, calling a function, or starting an `if` statement; they are all written the same way.

### Paradigm

The most popular paradigm is object-oriented programming, which binds variables and functions together into a discrete units called objects. They typically use those functions (which they call methods) to modify those variables.

Clojure uses a different paradigm called functional programming, in which all functions are "standalone" and can be passed to other functions as arguments. Moreover, it shuns direct modification of variables, preferring instead to have functions return a new copy at the end.

### From Java to Clojure

Making the leap from Java to Clojure is a big one because both the syntax and the paradigm is different. Java is a *C-like*, *object-oriented* language. Clojure is a *Lisp-like*, *functional* language. This is not an easy change to make, but in doing so, you can learn a whole new way of programming and learn to be curious, rather than fearful, when approaching unfamiliar subjects.

## Clojure Basics

Download and run [Nightcode](https://sekao.net/nightcode/). For now, we will stick with the REPL, which is the pane on the bottom left corner. REPL stands for read-evaluate-print-loop, another term for interactive consoles, which are a great way to get an initial feel for a language.

Let's start by playing with scalar values like numbers and strings. Notice that, just as in Java, simply adding `1` to the score does not modify the `score` variable. To make it equal to `2`, we must "overwrite" it with `(def score (+ score 1))`:

* `(def score 1)`
* `(+ score 1)`
* `(def score (+ score 1))`
* `(def health 100)`
* `(def health (* health 0.75))`
* `(def player-name "Alice")`
* `(= score 1)`
* `(not= score 1)`
* `(= player-name "Bob")`
* `(if (> score 0) "You won" "You lost")`

Now let's make a vector, which is similar to an `ArrayList` in Java. Notice again, though, that we can't mutate the vector directly. If we want to add "Daniel" to the end of `names`, we must overwrite the old value with `(def names (conj names "Daniel"))`:

* `(def names ["Alice" "Bob" "Charlie"])`
* `(conj names "Daniel")`
* `(def names (conj names "Daniel"))`
* `(get names 0)`
* `(count names)`
* `(shuffle names)`
* `(rand-nth names)`

To represent a player in a game, we'll use a map, similar to a `HashMap` in Java:

* `(def player {:name "Alice" :age 25})`
* `(get player :name)`
* `(assoc player :score 5)`

The things that start with a `:` are called keywords, and they have no direct equivalent in Java. In a way, they are like lightweight strings. They are often used as the keys in maps, but they can be used anywhere. One interesting feature is that they can act as functions that look themselves up, so `(get player :name)` and simply be written as `(:name player)`.

Now let's try defining a function. If I want to make a function that takes a name and says hello, I would do this:

```clojure
(defn say-hello [name] (println "Hello," name))
```

Now we can simply type `(say-hello "Alice")`.

They key takeaway on the first day of learning Clojure is that everything is immutable. You can add values to vectors and maps using `conj` and `assoc` respectively, but neither will directly modify the collection. Instead, you must always capture their return value and overwrite the variable if you want to change it. We will see in the future how this seemingly small difference in behavior will drastically change how you write software.
